hey this is presto Walker can you solve
this problem from a national exam in
Malaysia a cylindrical container with
length 20 centimeters is placed on the
floor against the wall as shown in the
diagram point Q is on the edge of the
base and Q is 2 centimeters from the
wall and 1 centimeter from the floor can
the cylindrical container feet inside a
box whose dimensions are 21 centimeters
by 7 centimeters by 7 centimeters why or
why not
now there's an unstated assumption that
the wall is perpendicular to the floor
this is something most of us would
assume but it's not necessarily true
there are walls and floors that are not
perpendicular but go ahead and assume
the wall is perpendicular and that this
is a perfect right cylinder can you
figure it out give this problem a try
and when you're ready keep watching the
video for the solution
so how can we figure out if the
cylindrical container can fit inside a
box with these dimensions we need to
check if the cylinders dimensions are
smaller than the box's dimensions we
know one dimension of the cylinder is 20
centimeters and that is smaller than the
box's dimension of 21 centimeters so
that dimension will fit inside the box
the other dimensions of the cylinder are
equal to the diameter of the circle this
will be the width and the height which
will be equal to the circles diameter
the question is is the circles diameter
smaller than 7 centimeters or larger
than 7 centimeters how can we figure it
out the only piece of information were
given is that Q is 2 centimeters from
the wall and 1 centimeter from the floor
so we can try a numerically estimate
what the circles dimensions need to be
we'll plot out the floor on the x-axis
and the wall on the y-axis we'll use a
little bit of graph paper and we'll draw
a diagram that's 2 scales so that we can
make a numerical estimate Point Q is 2
units from the wall and 1 unit from the
floor so we'll mark this point as a
negative 2 1 because it's 2 units left
of the wall and one unit above the floor
so what kind of circle would touch both
the floor and the wall and pass through
point Q well let's try a numerically
estimate this here's a circle that
contains Q it touches the wall on the
floor but it's not exactly passing
through Q and here's a circle that's
touching the wall on the floor that's
too big so let's use a computer
simulation to imagine growing the blue
circle and shrinking the green circle to
get exactly what kind of circle we would
need that passes through Q and touches
both the floor and
wall it turns out there is a unique
circle with this property we can now
measure the circles dimensions by
counting the units on this plot the
width will be equal to 10 units or 10
centimeters and the height will be also
10 centimeters so if all we cared about
was solving this problem numerically
we've figured it out the circle is not
smaller than 7 centimeters in its
diameter the circle is 10 centimeters by
10 centimeters so the circles width and
height are too large for the box that
has dimensions of 7 centimeters by 7
centimeters so in one way we found the
answer before mathematician this may be
unsatisfying while we have found a
method to numerically estimate the
diameter how can we solve for the exact
value furthermore we solve for a
specific value of Q but what if Q was a
different value by what method could we
solve the problem quickly for other
values of Q it wouldn't be cumbersome to
keep on trying to do the simulation for
every single value of Q but we might be
able to come up with a formula so that
we can instantly figure out what the
dimensions of the circle would be for
any value of Q so how can we approach
the problem and solve this more
generally we use the same approach we'll
have the floor on the x-axis and the
wall on the y-axis we have a circle
that's passing through point Q which
will be negative 2 1 there's one more
thing we know about the circle it's
tangent to the floor and the wall so we
can draw a square as such and each of
these dimensions will be one radius of
the circle so one radius left of the
wall will be negative R and one radius
above the floor will be positive R this
will be the circles Center at negative R
comma R
we want to find a circle centered at the
point negative R comma R that passes
through the point Q which equals
negative 2 1 a circle that is centered
at negative R R and has a radius of R
has the equation the quantity x plus r
squared plus the quantity y minus R
squared equals R squared we want this
circle to pass through the point Q which
equals negative 2 1 so we'll substitute
the value x equals a negative 2 and y
equals 1 into the above equation this
gives the quadratic equation the
quantity negative 2 plus r squared plus
the quantity 1 minus R squared equals R
squared we now have an equation in a
single variable R we can expand out each
of these binomials and then collect like
terms to one side to get the following
quadratic equation R squared minus 6 R
plus 5 equals 0 this can be factored
into the quantity R minus 5 and the
quantity R minus 1 we have 2 solutions R
equals 5 or R equals 1 let's check the
solution r equals 1 in that case the
point Q would not be in the corner
between the wall and the floor it would
actually be on the other side of the
circle so this does not correspond to
our original diagram and the problem
that we're trying to solve so we reject
the solution R equals 1 this means R is
equal to 5 and the diameter of the
circle is 2 times R which equals 10
centimeters just as before so once again
we figured out the circles diameter is
larger than 7 centimeters but we figured
out an exact value and we can take this
method and generalize it to solve for
any value of Q where Q is equal to
negative a B
we use the same general equation for a
circle that's centered at negative R R
and has a radius of are we then need
this circle to pass through the point Q
equals a negative a B so we substitute x
equals negative a and y equals B and we
end up with the following equation once
again we can expand each term and then
collect like terms we end up with the
following quadratic equation and we can
then use the quadratic formula to get
that the answers would be R is equal to
a plus B plus or minus the square root
of 2 a B we would then check if either
solution satisfies the original
constraints of the problem and that
would give us the value for R did you
figure out this problem thanks for
watching this video please subscribe to
my channel I make videos on math you can
catch me on my blog mind your decisions
if you like this video you can check out
my books which are listed in the video
description you can also support me on
patreon you can also catch me on social
media either at mind your decisions or
at pressure Locker
depending on the site